---
layout: post
title: Dynamics of Shape
---

1.Dynamics in architecture

Since the beginning of the twentieth century, dynamics became an important topic of intellectual speculation.
Futurists, with their love for speed, noise, machines, reveiled how a city functions as a complex mechanism.
How it moves and vibrates constantly, each component, each gear, being another machine. Paintings, sculptures,
poems and buildings cease to represent a static moment. The mechanism that generates the work, reflects
its inner dynamical structures. The creative forces are expressed in their constant moving essence (fig.6).
The domestic space in those years is not a rigid, solid, static following of walls and floors anymore: moveable
interiors mutate the rooms of the revolutionary “La Maison de Verre” by Pierre Chareau in Paris. In the same
years, facades become organically “alive” under the influence of Art-Nouveau Architects such as Horta, Guimard
and Gaudi. Structures inspired by nature are composed following geometric constructions of generatrix
curves moving over one or several lines known as directrices. Hyperbolic paraboloids, hyperboloids, helicoids
and cones were frequently used by Gaudì who adopted them from nature, analyzing rushes, reeds and bones.
The same research was developed in the groundbreaking work of architect, scientist and composer Iannis
Xenakis. He applied acoustic technologies, integrating musical ratios with complex ruled surfaces, for the
Philips Pavilion shown at the Expo ‘58 in Brussels (fig.7): a shell composed of nine hyperbolic paraboloids
which design was inspired by the dynamics of his early musical composition Metastaseis. [ 3 ]
These mathematical minimal surfaces, already theoretically introduced by the mathematician Joseph Louis
Lagrange in 1772, were solved geometrically exactly in these years. Recent discovery by Celso José da Costa
in 1982 renewed the interest in the geometrical properties of the embedded minimal surfaces. His intuitions
were developed and visualized a few years later by Eric W. Weisstein thanks to the progress of computer
graphics which allowed to solve more and more complex parametric formulas (fig.8). CAD technology enabled
experimenting the application of such surfaces, recently explored because of the optimized structural efficiency
thanks to their constant mean curvature.
The improvements of CAD softwares and hardwares nowadays enriches our design possibilities combining
infinitive sets of information. Computational Design seems to be the current key to explore and reproduce the
complexity and the beauty of Nature. Sometimes results are just mimetic imitations of Nature. Sometimes
they disclose how Nature responds to certain conditions, mutating the inner composition and physical structure
of living beings adapting them to selected impulses.
Two research trends are currently exploring this logic: one deploys artificial intelligence codifying and elaborating
the information, generating codes which ultimately are translated mechanically into preconfigured
reactions. The other directly links impulse and reaction, eliminating intermediary components if not directly
integrated in the material. The bio-chemical composition, physical properties and natural reactions of a material
are analyzed and subsequently translated into a controlled application of the various mutations displayed.
2.mechanicall y reactive membranes
Mainly used for art installations, this type of performative membranes frequently creates a playful interaction
with the visitor. Most kinetic membranes are based on the principle of movement detection: sensors register
body movement and pass the received information to a computer that generates a robotic, electronic or
electromechanic reaction.
David Letellier’s Versus installation (fig.9) creates interaction between mechanical sculptures through sound
emission. The work, sponsored by INSA foundation Lyon, consists of two kinetic sculptures placed face to face.
Each sculpture is controlled by a specific program. At the center of each corolla, a loudspeaker and a microphone
allow to play and record sounds. At regular intervals, each sculpture produces a sound, simultaneously
recorded and analyzed by the opposite sculpture, which then moves according to the frequencies of this sound.
HypoSurface (fig.10), a project developed by dECOi Architects and MIT Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
is a totally dynamic screen surface which physically moves according to any input (sound, movement, internet
feed, etc.) that can be linked to any output (logos, patterns, text, etc.).
In order to create a space reactive to brain activity, Guvenc Ozel, in collaboration with designer Alexander
Karaivanov and media artists Jona Hoier and Peter Innerhofer, hacked and reprogrammed a commercially available
device able to measure concentration levels and blinking. The team scripted a program translating the
data thresholds into motion and created the pavilion Celebral Hut (fig.11) with modular membranes expanding
according to the visitor’s cerebral activity.
The robotic facade of the Al-Bahar Towers by Aedas Architects (fig.12) uses solar responsive dynamic shading
screens, in the form of a ‘Mashrabiya’, that act as a secondary skin and control solar glare whilst optimising the
use of natural light internally.
